the sheriff's deputies arrived at the home in san antonio on a call that a woman had been injured in a domestic dispute. a bystanderstarted recording a video as they pursued a shirtless man armed with a knife outside the home. though taken from a distance, thevideo seemed to show the 41-year-old man, gilbert flores, raising his arms as the deputies opened fire, killing him.the video appeared on television, and local officials opened an investigation. but the case, which took place last year, has drawnlimited national attention -- a stark contrast with the fatal police shootings of black men in recent days in louisiana and minnesota,which have ignited protests and calls for reform around the country.to some latino advocates, it is just one example of how the killings of latinos in encounters with the police do not generate the samelevel of scrutiny, outrage or discourse as the fatal shootings of blacks.''why isn't the community aggressively championing the victims of these crimes?'' said juan cartagena, the president oflatinojustice, a legal advocacy group, who sees parallels in the strained relationship many african-americans and latinosexperience with law enforcement.there is no federal clearinghouse that tracks all police-related killings, criminal justice researchers say, so it is difficult to quantify howmany latinos are killed in encounters with officers. that has left advocates to rely largely on anecdotal evidence. even withjurisdictions that include hispanic or latino as an option in statistics, the numbers can be unreliable; it is not uncommon for people tobe incorrectly classified as white or black.''you don't know if the tick box is accurate or not,'' said geoffrey p. alpert, a professor of criminology at the university of southcarolina who researches police shootings and called the lack of a national database a ''national embarrassment.''but in recent years, multiple cases have roiled hispanics in different parts of the country. the fatal shooting of a 19-year-old man infullerton, calif., by california highway patrol officers this month led to modest protests, and the killing of a 17-year-old girl in denverin january 2015 spurred similar demonstrations.the death of a 35-year-old man in 2015 in pasco, wash., gunned down after throwing rocks at police officers, stirred the sizableimmigrant population there. some believed the killing, recorded on video, had the potential to become the ''ferguson moment'' forhispanics.''there are plenty of high-profile incidents across the country that for one reason or another don't seem to get the same attention,''said eric rodriguez, vice president for public policy at the national council of la raza.''there's sufficient amount of concern and outrage about what's happening,'' he added. ''this tension at the community level, it'spalpable.''activists and researchers say a range of factors, rooted in differences in history and culture, could explain why pockets of angercropping up after cases involving latinos have not grown to have a larger national impact. for one, hispanic does not denote a race,but rather an ethnicity; the sprawling population of hispanics has differing priorities, depending on region, nationality and citizenshipstatus.
also, latino advocates say, they do not have the same level of organization as african-americans to spread their concerns morewidely. for instance, they say, there is no figure with as high a profile as the rev. al sharpton, nor does religion play as big a role inactivism among hispanics. ''the catholic church,'' mr. cartagena said, ''really hasn't used that kind of messaging as a way togalvanize support.''for some, immigration is a more immediate, driving concern; a fear of confronting the authorities holds some back from being morevocal.''they interact with that whole system in a very different way because they have even fewer rights,'' said angelo falcn, co-founder ofthe national institute for latino policy. ''you have a lot of latinos who are living without papers, under the radar, who are abused byregular police as well.''but mr. cartagena expressed dismay at the idea that certain issues affect only certain groups of people -- that police brutality is anafrican-american issue, or immigration a latino concern. ''we live similar experiences with respect to marginalization of ourcommunities,'' he said. ''for this to really move the dial, it has to be done in solidarity with everyone else.''some in law enforcement acknowledge the tensions in their relationship with latinos. tina nieto, a captain in the los angeles policedepartment, said she has seen the police shift from being an ''occupying force'' in some neighborhoods to one that is more engagedwith residents. and as a commanding officer, she has sought to overcome the lingering skepticism toward the police.''there's a disconnect between what people believe sometimes and what the policing reality is,'' said captain nieto, the incomingnational president of the hispanic american police command officers association. ''sometimes it doesn't look pretty, but if you workto establish open lines of communication, we can have that dialogue.''in the case of mr. flores in san antonio, the bexar county sheriff's department has pushed back against the notion that he had hishands up in surrender, despite what the video depicts. (researchers have noted some shortcomings with video evidence.)james keith, a spokesman for the department, said mr. flores was moving toward the deputies when he was shot, and earlier, hehad tried to attack the deputies. a grand jury declined to press criminal charges against the deputies who shot him, both of whom hadlatino surnames.the orange county district attorney's office is investigating the death of pedro villanueva, the 19-year-old killed in california, whichhappened on july 3, just days before the shooting in baton rouge, la. california highway patrol officers followed mr. villanueva'sred pickup truck in their unmarked vehicle for about 10 miles. they tried to pull him over, the authorities said, but he made a u-turnand drove in the direction of the officers, who opened fire.''how would an innocent boy be killed like that?'' david sainz, mr. villanueva's brother, said in a phone interview from the family'smexican restaurant in the san fernando valley. ''he was such a good kid. he didn't have to be shot.''the district attorney and the highway patrol declined to comment.in 2012, genevieve huizar's 25-year-old son, manuel diaz, was fatally shot by the police in anaheim, a death that came during aspate of killings in the city that set off protests there. in the years since, ms. huizar has traveled across california protesting police-involved shootings. she helped found the young survivors legacy support network, which organizes picnics and vigils for relativeswho have lost loved ones.on wednesday night, almost four years to the day since her son's death, she is planning another vigil.''all these lives matter,'' she said. ''i believe it should be one movement to make the change for everybody.''caption(s):photos: top, friends and family of manuel diaz, a latino man killed by the police in anaheim, calif., release balloons in hismemory. protesters marched in downtown los angeles on wednesday. (photographs by ivan kashinsky for the newyork times; karla gachet for the new york times)copyright: copyright 2016 the new york times companyhttp://www.nytimes.comsource citation (mla 8th edition)rojas, rick, and samantha schmidt. "latinos seek more public scrutiny of their encounters with the police." new york times, 15       july 2016, p. a12(l). gale in context: science,       http://link.galegroup.com/apps/doc/a458095915/scic?u=valpo_main&sid=scic&xid=21954359. accessed 4 aug. 2019.gale document number: gale|a458095915